MINISTRY FOR FOREIGN AFFAIRS
Press Section
Check against delivery

NOT FOR PUBLICATION BEFORE 
9.00 a.m. ON 22 MARCH 1996
 















(Unofficial translation)

<pb>
Statement of Government Policy presented by the Prime Minister to 
Parliament, Friday 22 March 1996


Madam  Speaker, honourable Members of the Swedish Parliament,

Reducing unemployment is the foremost and overriding task of my 
Government. Our goal is that Sweden will have halved open unemployment to 
4 per cent by the year 2000.

The foundation for a sound society is undermined by today's high rate of 
unemployment. Both the national economy and morals and initiatives are 
weakened. Ultimately, the fight for full employment concerns the cohesion of 
Swedish society. 

The Government's policy to combat unemployment will rest on four corner-
stones:

The first corner-stone is stable and sustainable finances.

Sound public finances are the basis for all political ambitions. Efforts to put 
public finances on a better footing will continue. The goal is to limit the deficit 
to 3 per cent of GDP in 1997 and to achieve a balance in public finances in 
1998. A new budget process with a stronger follow-up and a nominal ceiling 
for expenditure will create favourable preconditions for commencing the 
necessary reduction of the public debt burden. Price increases have been 
forced down to under two per cent, and inflation will continue to be kept at a 
low rate. In this way, there will be scope for continued interest rate reductions.

Under no circumstances can the Government accept the further undermining 
of the welfare society by large deficits and a galloping national debt.
 
The second corner-stone is the provision of favourable conditions for 
companies and enterprise.

Sweden is a good country for enterprise. We have a flexible economy, a 
constructive climate for cooperation, and a competent and well educated 
labour force. The Government will further improve conditions for enterprise.

There has been a substantial increase in the number of jobs created in small 
and medium-sized businesses. This is a sound development which will be 
strengthened by vocational training, support for innovations, supply of capital 
and company support. The Government's policies will provide improved 
opportunities for new establishment, development and expansion. 

The local and regional role of economic policy will be emphasized. Regional 
development will thereby be reinforced, the EU's Structural Funds better 
utilized and industry and commerce promoted.

The role of the local authorities in labour market policy will be developed. The 
local authorities are the ones with expertise on local conditions and solutions.

Economic crime will be combated - both in order to uphold common values in 
society and to ensure that honest businessmen are not affected by unsound 
competition.

The supply of capital will be reinforced by the introduction of a sixth National 
Pension Insurance Fund which will have considerable opportunities for 
placing its assets in small and medium-sized companies.

The Government aims to pursue a more stable and predictable policy to 
improve the investment opportunities for companies and strengthen domestic 
demand.

The third corner-stone is life-long learning

Sweden will be competing with high qualifications, not low wages. The 
concept of life-long learning will be realized.  

School, pre-school and leisure centre services will be integrated in order to 
improve the first important years a child spends at compulsory school. The 
quality of upper secondary schools will be improved and post-secondary 
education will be expanded.
  
An additional 100,000 people will be given an opportunity for regular 
education, 70,000 of these in adult education. Priority will be given to those 
who have so far had the smallest share of society's educational resources. 
Unemployed persons will be given the opportunity to acquire upper secondary 
education.

Swedish higher education and research will continue to hold a position among 
the foremost in the world. Interdisciplinary and applied research will be 
reinforced and research cooperation between the EU countries fully utilized. 
Regional development will receive a powerful boost  by the expansion of the 
universities throughout the country. This will provide hope for the future, 
stimulate industry and commerce and create new jobs.

The fourth corner-stone is a new contract for cooperation.

Agreement has been the basis for the stability and trust in the future which 
has characterized Swedish society for so long. Cooperation is the key in the 
fight for full employment. 

A decline in unemployment must be combined with inflation at a good 
European level. This requires that both trade union organizations and 
employers take unique responsibility for extensive changes to the system of 
negotiation and wage formation, and for labour law. The Government and 
Parliament are ultimately responsible for stability in the labour market.   

Equal pay for equal work is a fundamental objective. Men and women shall 
have equal opportunities to support themselves and to combine an enriching 
professional life with active parenthood.

The special  competence of immigrants should be better utilized. Sweden's 
possibilities in the context of increasing internationalization will thereby be 
strengthened. 

Within the European Union, a growing number of countries are supporting the 
idea of formulating common aims for the fight against unemployment. This is a 
success for our policies. In order to intensify this work, it is highly important 
that a special chapter on employment be introduced into the EU Treaties. 

Sustainable public finances, favourable conditions for enterprise, life-long 
learning and a contract for cooperation are the four corner-stones. On this 
basis the Government invites the political parties, the parties to the labour 
market and all of the people of Sweden to jointly quell unemployment. Only in 
this way can we realize the Sweden of our dreams.

*          *          *

Globalization and internationalization have dramatically changed the 
conditions for politics and people's lives. Security is no longer merely a 
national concern. Increased international cooperation is needed to solve the 
major long-term questions concerning peace, democracy, security and the 
environment. Policies will therefore focus on four areas.

1. EU cooperation will be better utilized

Sweden's membership of the European Union is the continuation of a long 
tradition of dedication to cooperation and solidarity in international affairs. The 
Government will actively utilize the opportunities arising from Sweden's 
membership for creating prosperity and common security in our part of the 
world. Greater importance will be attached to EU issues in the domestic policy 
process. 

The Intergovernmental Conference which is to commence in a few days' time 
should pave the way for an enlargement of the EU. In addition, Sweden will be 
actively pursuing policies for reduced unemployment, increased openness and 
a good environment.

2. Peace, democracy and social justice will be assured throughout the 
world.

Sweden's commitment and responsibility does not end at Europe's borders. 
The United Nations is the most important tool for international peace and 
security, and for managing global threats to human survival. The Government 
will therefore act vigorously to address the UN's acute difficulties and need of 
reform. Sweden's candidacy for a seat on the UN Security Council is an 
expression of our unwavering support for effective international cooperation.  
We want to carry forward the fight for social justice, human rights and 
continued disarmament in the world. 

A world in deep economic and social imbalance will never be safe. The 
Government will therefore fulfil Sweden's tradition of active commitment to the 
peoples of the Middle East, Africa, Asia and Latin America.

Sweden's non-participation in military alliances, with the aim of making it 
possible for our country to be neutral in the event of a war in our vicinity, 
remains unchanged. Non-participation in military alliances will be combined 
with taking responsibility for security in our surrounding world.

Swedish voluntary personnel are carrying out an important mission full of risks 
in Bosnia. Through our participation in the International peace force, IFOR, 
Sweden is making a concrete contribution to international efforts to assist the 
parties in this war-torn country to attain lasting peace.

The new democracies are fragile and exposed to difficult pressures. They 
need our support in rebuilding their societies and economies. We will 
strengthen Sweden by helping others.

The Baltic Sea States Summit in Visby in May will be a crucial starting point 
for a broad drive for development and renewal around the Baltic Sea. The 
Baltic will once again become a sea that unites, develops and enriches 
people. By these means, a secure foundation for democracy and peace can 
be laid.





3. The environment will be a manifest long-term priority.

Threats to the environment are threats to life itself. The Government's aim is 
that Sweden should be an international driving force and a leading country in 
efforts to create a sustainable society. The ecological requirements may lead 
to the next major leap forward in growth. This requires active citizens but also 
clear policies to promote an ecocycle approach.

A new energy system will be developed. The phasing out of nuclear power 
should be initiated during this term of office and subsequently continue at an 
even pace. It should be effected in such a way that the competitive situation 
for power intensive industries is not jeopardized. On the basis of the 1991 
energy agreement, the report of the Commission on Energy and statements of 
opinion on the report, all the parties in Parliament are invited to discussions 
concerning energy policy. 

4. Security and responsibility will characterize society.

Swedish welfare will embrace us all. General welfare is effective and 
unrivalled in its capacity to create justice and social security for everyone. It 
enables people to fully use their initiative and their capacity.

Social insurance and the system of allowances will provide security in our 
changing everyday lives.This system of allowances and insurance will be 
adapted to circumstances which are becoming more common, such as 
changes of vocation, and also changes between work, studies and running an 
enterprise. Cheating and overexploitation of the system can never be tolerated 
and will be forcefully combated. 

Welfare presupposes fair distribution. Throughout the world we see that 
injustice and misfortune lead to increased criminality. Crime threatens 
people's security and in the long term also democracy. We can never tolerate 
a society in which fear spreads.

Culture and the media will contribute towards bridging gaps and to increasing 
respect and understanding among people. Diversity and versatility are 
necessary for democracy. Our cultural heritage must be preserved and also 
the values which multicultural Sweden creates. Public service radio and 
television guarantee a choice of programmes that reaches everyone.

Unemployment, segregation and racism are  the most disquieting problems in 
present-day society. If we do not succeed in consolidating the concept of the 
equal value of all people, there is a risk that society will break to pieces as a 
result of increasing tension. The whole of Sweden must therefore be mobilized 
to contribute towards increased integration. It is particularly important that 
priority is given to the fight against unemployment among immigrants.

Efforts to achieve equality between women and men in our society will 
continue. A gender equality perspective will permeate all aspects of the 
Government's policies. 

High quality local authority activities are the basis for Swedish welfare and 
crucial for gender equality and for counteracting segregation. Local authority 
activities in the field of medical, health and care services and schools will 
continue to receive priority over government grants.

In order to ensure that the supply of local authority services is evenly 
distributed, a new system was introduced for equalization of the costs and 
revenue of the local authorities. It will be carefully followed up and evaluated.

 The agreement concluded between the Government, the Federation of 
County Councils and the Association of Local Authorities has created 
favourable conditions for local authority activities and the national economy. 
The local authorities will be given stable rules. Redundancy notices and tax 
increases will be counteracted. Possibilities of fighting unemployment will 
thereby be improved.
*          *          *

Sweden is a rich country. We have a good environment, a high level of 
competence, advanced gender equality and considerable openness. These 
values will be safeguarded and developed.

Human value is always higher than any market value. 

The Government's objective is a society in which everyone has employment, 
feels a sense of participation and responsibility, and in which everyone 
receives the benefit of progress and development.

This will ensure the cohesion of Swedish society.
 



 

 



-  9  -




